Congratulations, we've made it through
the first part of the tutorial.
We're gonna get into the fun stuff now.
We're gonna begin part two
with a discussion of motion.
So, so far we've been assigning to
values inside our components and
that's been causing the DOM
to update immediately.
But sometimes we don't want that,
sometimes we want values to update
gradually over time, for
example is progress bar here.
It's cool that we can update the progress
bar like that, but it would be nice if it
smoothly animated to its new value and
in Svelt we can do that with motion stores.
Here progress is a writable store that
starts with the value of zero and
every time we press one of these buttons,
it sets a new value.
But if we change that writeable
to a tweened store like that and
replace the Svelte store
import with Svelte motion,
now when we press the buttons,
the bar animates smoothly.
Looks a little bit
robotic at the moment and
that's because we need to
add an easing function.
An easing function is a function that
takes a value between zero and one and
returns a value between zero and one.
By default it's just this.
This is the linear easing function that
we saw before, but you can do something
like we could square T like this and then
it'll do some very different behavior.
We actually have a library of easing
functions available in Svelte,
these formula were devised
by Ropana many years ago and
we just have a whole stack of them.
One of the most useful ones I find is
called cubic out which kind of smoothly,
it starts fast and then it smoothly
transitions to the final state.
So let's replace that.
Right, I find that to be
quite a pleasing motion and
we can set the duration
to whatever we want.
You can make it a super slow tween or
a very fast tween
depending on what it is
we're using the motion for.
There's a whole bunch of options that you
can pass to the tweened store, including
a custom interpolate function which allows
you to interpolate non-numeric values.
For example, maybe you wanna
transition between two colors.
Well, you can pass a function that knows
how to interpolate between two colors.
And you can also pass those options
when you call progress.set to override
the default values.
So tweening is one way to get motion, but
another way that is more applicable in
some circumstances is to use
some rudimentary spring physics.
It works particularly well for
values that are frequently changing
such as the mouse position.
If I move the mouse around here,
you will see that the orange dot
follows the cursor perfectly.
And again, we can just replace
the store that represents
the coordinates of the mouse
with a spring store.
Let's get rid of those,
replace with spring and again,
we're gonna import that
from Svelte motion.
And now when I move the mouse around,
the circle kind of lags behind
a little bit and
moves in this pleasing smooth manner.
Now, springs have some settings
that you can apply to them.
They have a stiffness setting and
a damping setting that determines
how they respond to changes.
And we can specify our own initial values.
So for the spring value here, for the
coordinates we'll specify a stiffness of
0.1, 1 would mean that
the spring was perfectly stiff,
0 would mean that it's not stiff at all.
And we'll set a damping
value of 0.25 like that.
And now we see we get some very
different and more springy behavior.
And we can change those.
And you can sort of get a feel for
how the different values will
affect the behavior of the spring.
Another way that we can make user
interfaces a little bit more appealing is
by gracefully transitioning
elements into and out of the DOM.
And Svelte has something that helps with
this called the transition directive.
So let's import the fade
transition from Svelte transition.
And this text here which
becomes visible when
the checkbox is checked and
invisible when it's not,
we can add the transition
directive to that element.
Transition:fade to reference
the function that we just imported.
And now when we toggle this, you'll see
that the text fades in and it fades out.
And we can parametrize these transitions.
So let's get rid of the fade and
turn it into a fly transition.
And we'll give it some values.
We'll give it 200 wide pixels and
a slow duration of 2000 milliseconds.
I'm gonna change the word fades to
the word flies, so that is correct.
And now when we toggle that, we're gonna
see it fly in and out of the DOM.
And what's interesting is that this
transition is reversible if while
it's transitioning out,
we change our mind and bring it back.
Then it doesn't start from the end or
start from the start.
It starts from wherever it was at
the moment that the state change happened.
So this is a nice way to make transitions
that almost feel like they're
behaving as physical objects
would within your user interface.
Sometimes you want to have a transition
that applies when the element enters
the DOM and
one that applies when it leaves the DOM
that are separate from each other.
So for example, we might want this
text to fly in but then fade out.
And we can do that by using both
transitions together, import fade.
And then down here, we'll change
the transition:fly into in:fly so
that it applies when
the element enters the DOM.
Then we'll add out:fade,
flies in, fades out.
Now, one thing that you'll notice
is that this is not reversible,
there's no way that we
can make this reversible.
So if we toggle the state rapidly,
then it will start flying in from
the beginning of the transition instead of
trying to figure out what some
intermediate position would be.
So far we've been using
the built-in transitions, and
it's useful to be able to import those,
but we can also create our own
because sometimes you will have
some very specific requirements.
The way that transitions work is,
well, they're just functions.
This is the fade transition that
we were looking at earlier.
It's a function that receives the element
in question together with the options that
were passed in.
And it returns this transition object
which has some values like delay and
duration.
And most importantly,
this CSS method which given a value
between zero and one, return some CSS.
Zero means it's the beginning of
the intro or the end of the outro.
One means it's the element's final
resting state once it's in the DOM.
So in this case, we're setting
the opacity to t multiplied by
the elements native opacity which
we get with getComputedStyle.
So zero before the element has
transitioned in, t will be zero,
the opacity will also be zero.
One once the element
is settled in the DOM,
it'll be one times
whatever that value was.
And so we can create our own CSS method
to create our own transition effects.
And what Svelte will do is it will
run that method at the beginning of
the transition to get a list of keyframes.
So for
the fade transition that we just saw,
these are the keyframes
that you will end up with.
It will then put those keyframes
into a style sheet and
add the relevant CSS to
the element in such a way that
the actual animation is
happening entirely in CSS.
So it's not running code on every frame
and updating the style of that element,
it's all being done in CSS.
And the advantage of that is that it will
frequently run off the main thread on
the compositor, and it will do so in a way
that doesn't block any other JavaScript
from happening and isn't blocked by
other JavaScript from happening.
This is useful for making your transition
smooth and it's also better for
your battery life and so on.
Right, so
let's make a really wacky transition.
I'm gonna begin by importing
the elastic out transition.
And we're gonna create
our own CSS method here.
At the moment, it's not doing anything.
Let's turn this into a function
that returns a whole block of CSS.
We'll ease the value
with elasticOut.
And then transform it with a scale and
a rotation.
All right, and
1,080 degrees is 3 times 360, so
we're gonna make this thing
spin around three times.
And then the color is gonna use HSL.
Which if you haven't used HSL before,
it's a really nice way to declare
colors because you're defining a hue
which is a value between 0 and
360, where 0 and 360 are pure red.
And then it kinda transitions
through a rainbow.
S is the saturation and
then L is the lightness.
And it gives you a way to manipulate
colors in a way that's a lot easier to
predict and understand than when you're
dealing with things like RGB values.
Okay, so Math.trunc(t * 360).
We're using .trunc to get an integer value,
which the hue needs to be.
And then we're going to
create a saturation which,
don't worry too much about the details
of this formula, it's just for effect.
Right, and if I've done this right,
then hopefully when we toggle
the visible state we're gonna
get a fun little transition.
So you can do pretty much
whatever you want here.
You have the full power of JavaScript but
we're not actually using
JavaScript to apply these styles.
It's all happening in CSS.
So we sort of get the best of both worlds.
Sometimes you can't
express everything in CSS.
Sometimes you actually do
need to run code on each
frame of the animation in order
to get the desired effect.
So for example, we might wanna
create a typewriter effect where
this text here becomes visible
one character at a time.
And we can do that by instead
of returning a CSS method,
we can return a tick function which
applies some manipulation to the DOM.
So here's our typewriter transition,
again, we're just passing in the node
that the transition is gonna be
applied to together with some options.
I'm gonna grab a copy of the node's text.
And the duration of this transition is
gonna be based on the length of the text.
So that's gonna be text.length
divided by the speed expressed in,
I'm actually not sure
what this is in seconds.
And we pass that duration back to Svelte so
it knows how long this
transition should take.
And then we're gonna
create a tick function.
Which is gonna be called on each frame.
And "i" is gonna be the number of characters
of the string that we should show.
And we can calculate that
with (text.length * t).
Again, we're using Math.trunc because
we need this to be an integer.
And we can set the textContent
of the node to text.slice(0, i).
And now when we toggle visible, the text
is written on one character at a time.
And because we're using transition
here as opposed to in or
out, this is also reversible
just like our CSS transitions.
In some cases, it's useful to know when
your transitions are starting and ending.
And so Svelte dispatches transition
events when you have an element
that uses transitions.
We have a status value here and
we're just gonna assign to that
value when these events happen.
So the paragraph element here,
we're gonna create some event
listeners on:introstart.
We're gonna set the status
to intro started.
And I'm just gonna copy
that line four times.
We're gonna change
the intro there to outro and
we're gonna change
the start here to end and
we're gonna change that intro to outro.
And now when we toggle the visibility
of the element, we'll see that
the outro started, the outro ended,
the intro started and the intro ended.
It's not something that you use a lot but
it's useful to have when you do need it.
Okay, so ordinarily transitions
will play on elements when
any container block is added or destroyed.
And so in the example here,
these elements are removed when we change
the length of the list
which is what we want.
But they're also removed when
we remove the list entirely.
And in this case,
let's say that's not what we want.
We want the list to only appear and
disappear when the checkbox is toggled.
But we want the individual elements to
transition out as we play with the slider.
And we can do that by turning the slide
transition that's being applied to those
elements into a local transition.
Just like event modifiers,
we add the pipe symbol to where
the transition is declared and
add the local modifier.
And so now the transition continues to
play when the length of the list changes.
But if I toggle this list, the whole
thing will just disappear altogether.